[hard rock music]
♪ ♪
‐ I'm John Thunert.
I'm 58 years old.
I'm in pest control.
I like to refer to myself
as a hired killer.
I love termites.
‐ My name is Tanner Hetke.
I mainly work
as a welding fabricator.
My grandfather
is a metallurgist,
my dad was a farrier,
and so metal has been part of
my family for quite some time.
‐ My name is Jason Palmer,
and I've been bladesmithing
for about five years.
I have seven kids at home.
My strength
in a competition like this
is that having had
as many kids as I've had,
I've dealt with almost every
problem, I think, imaginable,
so when it comes
to challenges here,
I'm not afraid of the unknown.
‐ My name's Jeff Peters.
My wife calls me
a renaissance man.
I'm an IT engineer.
I was in a band
for about 14 years,
I was a tattoo artist, and
then I found bladesmithing.
They say you either win
or you learn.
You don't really lose.
But I still want to win.
[laughs]
‐ Bladesmiths, welcome
to The Forge.
You're here to compete
in three timed rounds
of edged
weapon‐making competition
in front of a panel
of expert judges
in the hopes of becoming
a new "Forged in Fire" champion
who also walks out of here
with $10,000.
Let's meet your judges now.
Up first, two‐time
"Forged in Fire" champion
Ben Abbott,
next, historic weapons
recreation specialist
David Baker,
and last, edged weapons
specialist Doug Marcaida.
‐ Gentlemen, there's a saying
that good things
come in threes.
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
This is a little challenge
that we're calling Three Cans.
You will have to forge
three different
canister Damascus billets.
One can will contain
10‐series steel,
another can will contain
52100 ball bearings,
and in the third can,
you'll use railroad spikes.
‐ I wanted canister,
but I didn't want
three stinking
little tiny canisters.
That's three times
the chances to screw up,
and there's no opportunities
for screw‐ups here.
‐ Once you've forged out
those three billets,
you'll have to combine them
into one ultimate
Damascus billet,
which you will
in turn forge weld together
to create one signature blade
that falls within
the following parameters:
the length of your blade must
be between 12 and 15 inches.
The overall length
must not exceed 22 inches.
In the second round, you'll
attach handles to those blades
so that we can test them
for strength and durability
in a railroad spike chop
and for edge retention
in an apple slice.
You will have three hours
to forge your blades.
Good luck, gentlemen.
Your three hours starts now.
♪ ♪
Ben, what do you think
of this challenge?
‐ It's a very
difficult challenge.
You've got that
mild steel railroad spike,
and you have to figure out
where it's gonna end up
on the edge of that blade.
The last thing you want to do
is put that can
in the center of the knife,
'cause you can sharpen up
that railroad spike
and end up with mild steel
on the edge.
♪ ♪
‐ My game plan is, I'm gonna do
these cans one at a time.
I've got a little less chance
of mixing them up that way.
‐ There's a lot of Liquid Paper
or Wite‐Out coming out,
so it looks like
some of our smiths
are planning on peeling cans.
‐ That can is mild steel.
Mild steel is not gonna take
and hold an edge
like high‐carbon steel.
‐ Of all of our challenges,
this is a pretty good one
to cut that can away,
'cause then you can manipulate
those blocks of steel
you have into a nice pattern.
‐ Yeah, but there's three cans
to cut away.
‐ I know, I know.
‐ But it makes it three times
as hard.
‐ You have to remove
those sections of can that
are gonna be
touching one another.
You can leave the cans
on the outside.
♪ ♪
‐ Well, I've done
canister before,
and it's a lot different
when you have to do
three of them at one time.
‐ Getting to the point where
the cans are off
and they're drawn out
to the forge weld,
that's gonna be
the hardest part.
‐ Now it's time to start
packing my cans.
When I put the caps
on them,
I put them down
inside of my can.
If you go to press your billet
and that cap is on the outside,
it can pop off of there.
‐ Jeff has spent a lot of time
sizing those lids
to be perfect.
Just hug it, man.
The weld would take up
all that gap.
‐ It's a lot quicker
to probably weld the top
on the outside of the cans,
but I'm thinking it's probably
gonna be worth it in the end.
♪ ♪
‐ I've never made any
canister Damascus before.
I'm just kind of flying by
the seat of my pants right now.
I want to make sure that I
know which can is which one,
so I mark them.
I put one stripe
for the railroad,
two stripes
for the ball bearings,
and three stripes for the 1095.
♪ ♪
‐ I have never made
canister steel.
What better place to learn
than right here
in the middle of a competition
with the whole world watching?
I'm trying to get the hardened
steel to weld together inside
so that I'll have some good,
hardenable steel later.
‐ Those cans are a little
on the red side,
but deep in the center
of that can,
it's not hot enough to weld.
‐ As I'm working my cube,
I suddenly realize
that I don't know
what steel I'm working.
Son of a bitch.
If I don't know where
this railroad spike is,
I don't know where it's going
to end up inside the knife.
♪ ♪
‐ Everything seems to be
going real well,
and now comes the booger.
I got to get those
freaking cans off.
‐ If you have Wite‐Out in there
and you haven't peeled the can,
that Wite‐Out can
cause delaminations.
‐ Uh‐uh, it ain't coming apart.
It's got the Wite‐Out.
It's supposed to come apart.
It's time to think
of a new approach.
If I can't beat it off,
I'm gonna freaking
grind it off.
‐ If you leave the cans on,
you have to do a lot of
grinding,
you know, to see those sparks,
to see the high‐carbon steel
that's at the edge.
‐ It's time‐consuming
but precise.
‐ [groans]
‐ Tanner is really struggling
with his can.
‐ I'm spending so much time
just trying
to get this one can off.
I have no idea
if I'm gonna be able
to get the other two cans
off in time
to be able
to actually finish this.
♪ ♪
‐ John's way out ahead
of the pack.
‐ Now that I got my cans off,
I've got my three
nice little billets.
Now I got to figure out
how to put them all together
to make one bar.
There's a couple ways
to approach it.
You can take
and put them side by side
and have different metals
going this way...
♪ ♪
Or you can have them
going lengthwise.
♪ ♪
The steels, they kind of cool
at different rates.
My biggest concern was warpage.
If I put those
three steels side by side
instead of top to bottom,
I'm concerned
I'm gonna get that warpage.
‐ John stacked his steel but,
like, fingers stacked up.
‐ The hard part about it is,
it's relatively narrow
but really tall.
A lot of times when you try
hammering that together,
it rolls,
and it can bend into,
like, a C‐shape
and shear the weld right off.
♪ ♪
‐ Bladesmiths,
90 minutes has elapsed!
‐ So I've got my two billets
laid out to where
I can weld them together.
I start working
on my third cube,
and I start to see sparks
shoot out.
♪ ♪
Oh, that looks bad.
There must've been a hole
to allow some air
to get in there and ruin
the weld inside of my cube.
We have to have all
three steels in this knife
ad.
‐ Oh.
‐ I don't know
which cube is which
and we have to have all
three steels in this knife
and I'm not 100% certain,
but I think it looks like
the 52100 ball bearings
falling out,
or so I hope,
so I have
to go create a new cube.
‐ He has no idea
if he's gonna have
three different kinds
of Damascus at the end of this.
He just kind of made
his best guess
that it was the ball bearing
Damascus that failed him.
‐ Well, if that's the case,
grind the mild off the two
that you have, etch them,
and see what you got.
If there are spheres in it,
you've got ball bearings.
He could end up
with two ball bearing billets
and one other thing.
‐ If Jason only has
two different types
of Damascus in his blade,
that's a parameter failure,
and that can send him home.
‐ I have no idea how this is
going to happen yet,
but I know
I'm going to make it happen.
‐ Tanner's in danger of not
even having a blade
if he doesn't cut
these billets free
and forge weld them together.
‐ I don't have a whole lot
of time left,
but I still haven't
gotten this can off.
I have no idea
if I'm gonna be able
to get the other two cans
off in time
to be able
to actually finish this.
I don't know what else to do.
‐ I do not want to get
these mixed up.
I know that the railroad spike
is not hardenable,
so I'm thinking
I probably want that
on the outside of my blade.
I definitely don't want it
on the cutting edge.
‐ Jeff is stacking his billets
side by side,
but if I was doing this,
I'd stack them front to back
so my railroad spike billet
becomes my tang
and there's no chance of me
getting mild steel on my edge.
‐ I chose to set the billets
by hand rather than the press
because it's something
that I'm familiar with.
You can actually feel
when you hit the billet
that you're making
when it starts to set
and get solid,
and I wanted to make sure that
I was doing things the way
they I know that they work
and it was gonna be a success.
Oh, yeah.
That's what you want to hear.
You want to hear that ring.
♪ ♪
‐ My new cube
is coming along okay,
so I think I'm going to be
able to weld them together.
Time‐wise,
I know I'm way behind,
but I know that I can find
a way to make this time work.
I've been through
some of the biggest challenges
a man can go through.
A couple years ago,
I buried my child,
and this might be
a challenge today,
but I've overcome much harder.
♪ ♪
‐ Now that I've finally gotten
all three cans taken apart,
I've only got about
30 minutes left
to get all my pieces
forge‐welded together
and hopefully drawn out
into a blade.
I'm hoping for a miracle
right now.
‐ We've seen the improbable
happen here in The Forge,
so let's hope for the best.
‐ As I set my welds by hand,
it's actually
looking a lot better than
I thought it was going to.
I finally got a semi‐defined
blade shape going,
but I've got so much to do.
♪ ♪
‐ I had to go two aprons.
My belly's burning.
I need less belly, more apron.
Picking the billet up.
I'm dropping it.
I'm picking the billet up,
dropping it.
Son of a bitch.
I think
when all's said and done,
I'm gonna own
the world's record
for "Forged in Fire"
drops of steel on the floor,
and now it's go time.
It's time for the dunk.
♪ ♪
‐ We got a blade quenched.
‐ [sighs]
I made it.
‐ You only have 15 minutes
left, gentlemen!
‐ Thank you.
♪ ♪
‐ Man, look at the warp
on that thing!
‐ Wow.
‐ Holy smokes.
Man, oh, man, that thing
looked like a truck rim.
‐ It is absolutely
the worst warped blade
I have ever seen in my life.
‐ If you quench with mild
on one side
and hardenable steel
on the other,
this side gets bigger
and curves that blade around.
‐ How does Jeff
correct this warp?
‐ You can bend it the wrong way
and then
quench it back to straight.
‐ So overcorrect,
then you re‐quench,
and then you
put it in the vise.
‐ Yeah, yeah.
‐ I'm gonna use
every single second
that I have
to try to address it.
♪ ♪
‐ If I have problems
in the quench,
I have no time to fix anything.
Here goes nothin'.
♪ ♪
‐ Ah, Jason just quenched.
‐ Yeah, baby.
I don't know what steel I have
exactly and what order,
and I'm pretty certain
I saw the ball bearings
fall out of my billet,
so I think I'm okay.
‐ Five minutes!
♪ ♪
‐ It's an actual piece of metal
that doesn't look awful.
‐ It's looking actually
pretty good.
He might pull it off.
‐ I'm just trying to get
as much of this blade
ground as possible.
I have never leaned so hard
on a grinder in my life.
‐ 20 seconds!
‐ All right, I'll just quick
dunk it in the ferric acid,
and when I pull it out,
I notice this massive warp.
Oh, my gosh, what the heck?
I have to get this warp out.
‐ Five, four, three, two, one!
Bladesmiths,
shut down your machines!
Drop your tools!
This first round
of competition is over!
Tanner's blade is snapped.
‐ Oh, my God.
‐ What a traumatic end
to a tremendous comeback.
‐ I know.
‐ And he worked hard for that.
‐ [sighs]
♪ ♪
‐ I'm more disappointed
at myself because
I knew better
than to try and fix it,
and now I have to hand in
two pieces to the judges.
Pretty sure
I'm going home at this point.
‐ Bladesmiths,
it's time for the judges
to critique your work.
Jeff, you're up first.
Please present your work
to the judges.
♪ ♪
‐ I like the profile
of this knife,
but I don't think I've ever
seen a warp that bad.
If I put a cherry there,
I could launch it
into my mouth.
I saw that in both quenches
that it warped the same way,
and I have a feeling
it's because perhaps
this side is hardenable,
this side might have
the railroad spike on it,
and when you harden, it can
give you a warp like this.
if you do go forward,
it's gonna be interesting
to see how you deal
with this warp,
'cause it really needs
addressing.
‐ John, you're up next.
Please present your blade
to the judges.
♪ ♪
‐ What I like is the way
you set up your weld,
stacking like this
instead of like this.
You didn't get
any warping at all.
The main thing right now
is taking it down
to where it's a comfortable,
usable weight.
Right now, it's a beast.
I have swords that are lighter
than this thing.
‐ Then there's
the obvious issue.
‐ Tanner...
♪ ♪
Every blade has
its breaking point,
and, unfortunately,
you found yours.
But what an amazing round.
With 20 minutes left,
you didn't even have any
of your cans welded together,
but you stuck in there,
and for that, we commend you.
‐ Thank you. I appreciate it.
‐ And now the
not‐so‐obvious issue. Ben?
‐ Jason, one of your canisters
failed you.
♪ ♪
You decided to start again
with a new can
on the assumption that
the one that failed you
was 52100 ball bearings.
I wasn't so sure, so I took
the can that failed you
and I etched it
to see what was inside.
If it were, in fact,
52100 ball bearings,
we would see disks of different
colors inside that pattern,
but that's not what I found.
What I found was this:
the outline
of a railroad spike.
Your failed billet
wasn't 52100 ball bearings.
It was, in fact,
the railroad spike,
which means that your knife
doesn't have any
railroad spike in it at all.
♪ ♪
Tanner, you managed to combine
all three canisters,
weld them all together,
and make a knife.
Yes, it broke at the end,
but we feel that
that's something
that could be repaired.
Jason, your knife doesn't
contain all three canisters
and that's not something
that you can repair
and that's the reason
we're sending you home.
‐ Jason, please
surrender your weapon.
‐ Ultimately, I had
a one‐in‐three shot
of getting the right material,
and I chose poorly.
I'm proud of what
I was able to accomplish.
I'm going home
with my head held high
and able to show my kids
that there is still success
and happiness
even when you fail.
♪ ♪
‐ All right, bladesmiths,
congratulations.
You've made it to the second
round of this competition,
and now that those blades
have been tempered,
it's time to complete them
by attaching handles to them
using the range of materials
provided in our pantry.
You also have three hours
in which to complete your work.
Now, I suggest, Tanner,
that you guys use
some of that time
to address the flaws and issues
that the judges identified
in your blades.
However,
keep an eye on the clock,
because when the time runs out,
your weapons will be tested
for strength and durability
in a railroad spike chop
and for edge retention
in an apple slice.
Bladesmiths, I remind you
that at the end of this round,
one of you will have
to surrender your work
and leave The Forge.
Good luck.
Your three hours starts now.
♪ ♪
All of our smiths
are out there on The Forge.
None of them are sitting
in a great position right now.
John pretty much turned
in a dolphin‐nosed anchor.
‐ Yeah, I mean, he really needs
just time on grinder.
‐ Now it's just my 500‐pound
weight loss program.
The blade's already
been hardened,
it's already been tempered,
and if I try to take
too much off too quick
and don't cool it,
I'm gonna ruin what I have.
What I've worked so hard
to make is gonna be trash.
‐ I am super excited
that I'm still here.
I definitely thought
that I was gonna be going home.
I mean, who makes it
to the second round
with two pieces of a blade?
Now that I know that I'm not,
I just‐‐I don't have a knife
to fit and finish.
‐ What does Tanner have to do
to get back in the game here?
‐ He's gonna have to weld
his blade back together.
He can do it with
the big welder
and end up with some
mild steel at the edge,
or he could use
the oxyacetylene torch
and use a little bit of his own
tang or blade as filler rod
to make an entirely
high‐carbon knife again.
‐ The nice thing about that is
that then you've got all
the same steel running
through the entire blade.
‐ My plan is, I'm gonna go
to the MIG welder
and put it all together.
I work as a welding fabricator
right now,
so I'm pretty confident
in the fact
that I can
weld it back together,
but no matter how good
of a welder you are,
welding mild steel
onto a hardenable blade
is not a good idea.
If you put a weld down
the center of something,
everything around it
is now soft.
‐ Bladesmiths, you have
two hours
remaining to finish your work.
‐ Getting this warp out
of my blade,
I know it's gonna take
a lot of time,
but if I don't do that,
it's not gonna perform
well in the test, and
I'm probably gonna go home,
so I'm trying to soften
the spine
while keeping
the cutting edge cool,
thus the little rig
and the bucket of water here.
I'm hoping by drawing
the hardness in the spine
back a little bit that
I can overcorrect the bend
and hopefully
get most of it out.
You know, I'm gritting my teeth
and just praying
that the knife's
not gonna break.
This is probably one
of the most stressful things
that you could do to a knife
that you've worked so hard on.
‐ As I'm grinding, I notice
that I have this little dip
in my blade
right where the weld is,
and the reason is because
that steel is mild steel.
It grinds a lot faster than
the hardened steel around it,
so I add
a few more weld beads,
trying to give it
a little bit more strength.
I'm not super confident
in my blade at the moment.
I'm just hoping that it
at least makes it through
the challenge
without breaking again.
‐ Bladesmiths, you have
60 minutes remaining
to finish your blades!
‐ I've got my scales cut
and my holes drilled
and I'm putting
the handle together
and one of the bolts
seems to be kind of stripped.
Something is just not
quite right,
and the epoxy is curing.
With this five‐minute epoxy,
you don't have a lot of time
to mess around.
You either get it right
the first time
or you have
to redo everything.
And finally I just
run across the room,
grab a pair of pliers,
hang onto that,
and screw for all I'm worth
and I'm able to
get it threaded enough in
where I think it's gonna work.
♪ ♪
‐ So going into the handle,
the time crunch is still there
and it's still intense.
But at the same time,
I'm in my comfort zone.
I really enjoy the fit
and finish of putting
handles on knives.
I enjoy it as much,
if not more,
than forging
the blades themselves.
‐ Tanner grabbed some kind
of burl wood.
‐ Purpleheart, which is a super
oily, super strong wood.
‐ Honestly, I'd be happy
if my blade snapped in half
and Ben Abbott said,
"You know,
your blade snapped in half,
but dang, man,
this handle's comfortable."
Like, that would make me happy.
I'd be like, "All right,
it broke once before.
It's fine."
‐ Bladesmiths, you only have
30 minutes remaining
in this round!
Jeff didn't get that warp
all the way out of his blade.
Should he try to pull
that warp out?
‐ I'd step away.
‐ The cards are stacked
against me a little already
because I had this warp.
I decide to go ahead,
and I put my knife back
into my straightening jig.
‐ Oh, no.
‐ Oh, boy.
Problems start to happen
when we start to do this.
‐ Please don't break.
Please don't break.
It's not perfect, but
it's gonna cut some apples.
‐ Ten minutes!
‐ I dropped my steel
on the floor so many times,
I'm not 100% sure
where the railroad spike is.
The etch
is gonna tell me that.
If the railroad spike
is on the edge
where they're gonna be
chopping on it,
it's gonna deform.
It might send me home.
Some get darker,
some get gray,
and I think I see
that chunk of spike
and I think it's on the spine.
I'm feeling
a lot more relieved.
‐ Five, four, three, two, one.
Bladesmiths,
stop what you're doing.
Drop your tools. This second
round of competition is over.
‐ Nice job, man.
I'm not super happy
with the way it turned out,
but at least it's one piece
instead of what I had before.
I'm just really hoping
that it doesn't break again.
‐ Gentlemen, this is
the strength test,
a test of the strength
and durability of your blades
as well as the overall
construction of your knives.
I'm gonna take this, and I'm
gonna beat them onto those.
Remember,
this test is all about
what happens to your knives
and not what happens
to the spikes.
Jeff, you're up first.
You ready for this?
‐ Be a negative,
Ghost Rider.
‐ Oh, it's a positive,
‐ All the work that I did
to straighten the blade
the best I could could've
possibly also affected
the hardness of the edge.
[intense music]
♪ ♪
‐ Well, Jeff,
of the three strikes,
the first one is the only one
that did any noticeable damage.
The other two, I can't even
really tell that I ever hit it.
There is still quite
a significant warp in here,
but I know that you've taken
a lot of it out,
so nice job on doing that
without breaking anything.
‐ Thank you.
‐ John, you're up next.
You ready?
‐ Be gentle.
[laughter]
♪ ♪
I have never, ever
whacked anything I've made
into a piece of metal.
What kind of sane person
would do that?
♪ ♪
‐ Look away.
[intense music]
♪ ♪
‐ Whew.
‐ John, your knife
is certainly in one piece.
There is three spots here
that you can see
exactly where I hit
the railroad spikes.
Other than that,
it's a good‐looking knife.
‐ Thank you, sir.
‐ Tanner, you're up next.
You ready?
‐ Do what you got to do.
I'm very nervous.
Not really sure
how mine's gonna hold up,
especially in that weak spot.
I'm not ready.
I may end up with just a hunk
of mangled steel
at the end of this challenge.
[exhales]
[intense music]
♪ ♪
‐ Yeah!
‐ It didn't break again.
‐ It's all in one piece,
well done.
‐ Thank you.
‐ The big thing to talk about
is, right at your weld,
there's significant deflection.
I mean, it's rolled
completely over,
but it's amazing
to see you come through
and come up with
a really good‐looking knife.
‐ Thank you very much.
‐ All right, gentlemen,
it's time for the sharpness
test, the apple slice.
What I want to see is those
apples cleanly cut through,
as opposed to cut part
of the way and then broken off.
Now, Jeff, you're up first.
You ready?
‐ Let's get it and growl.
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
‐ Oh.
‐ Jeff, you've got
that warp in there,
and I think as I came down
that rail,
it started to just kind
of fly up out of there.
It's definitely sharp.
Definitely cut.
Good job.
‐ Thank you, sir.
‐ Way to go, man.
‐ All right, John,
you're up next. You ready?
‐ I'm terrified.
‐ They're apples, come on.
[laughter]
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
‐ Whoa. Whoa.
Can't believe it.
[laughs]
‐ All right, John,
as far as cutting goes,
this thing's got a good edge
on it and it cuts beautifully.
‐ Oh, thank you, sir.
‐ Really nicely done.
All right, Tanner, you ready?
‐ I guess so.
‐ My blade definitely took
some edge damage.
It might not do great
on the apple slice.
If I don't make it through
all these apples, I'm done.
Here we go.
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
‐ Right off,
real basic‐looking handle.
It's really comfortable.
‐ Thank you.
‐ It sliced really nicely,
and then about three,
four apples in,
it starts cracking them
and then starts cutting again
really nice.
That's probably right where
that chunk out of the middle
was as it passed
through the apples here,
started catching them there,
and then got back into
that sweet spot.
But you've got enough edge here
that it cuts really well.
‐ Thank you very much.
‐ Bladesmiths, judges have made
their final decision.
The bladesmith leaving
The Forge is...
♪ ♪
Tanner.
‐ Tanner, your blade took
significant damage
on the strength test,
and it showed on the apple
slice of the sharpness test,
and for that reason,
we're sending you home.
‐ Tanner, please
surrender your blade.
‐ I'm obviously disappointed,
but I came here
to prove to myself
that I was
a legitimate blacksmith,
and I think I did that.
If I could give any advice
for smiths
going on "Forged in Fire,"
it would be, don't take
your time for granted.
One second can change
everything.
‐ John, Jeff, you gentlemen
are entering the final round
of this three‐round
competition.
Now we're sending you back
to your home forge
to recreate this iconic weapon
from history.
That weapon is...
♪ ♪
The messer...
And bi knife.
‐ It gon' be a challenge.
‐ The messer,
which translates
to "knife" in German,
was an imposing 15th‐century
sword classification.
These weapons ranged in size
from single‐handed
thrusting knives
that were ideal for stabbing
to two‐handed killers
designed to brutally slash
and destroy enemies
with a single blow.
It's most distinguishing
characteristic
is its long hilt,
often secured with rivets,
that was not only aesthetic
but protected the hand
and knuckles from attacks.
Extremely versatile,
the blade's thick,
slightly curved profile
and large clip point
were popular with both
soldiers on the battlefield
and noblemen
for hunting game.
Complementing the messer,
German hunters also carried
a small utility bi knife
for skinning
and eating after the hunt.
Your blades must fall within
the following parameters:
the length of your messer
must be between
24 and 26 inches in length.
You must have a fuller
on each side of the blade.
On the handle, you must have
a disconnected knuckle bow,
rear quillion,
and small side guard.
The bi knife's blade must
measure between 7 and 8 inches,
and both of these blades
need to be sharper
than a middle school mathlete,
gentlemen.
We believe you're both
talented bladesmiths,
so we're not going to make
this easy for you.
You will have only four days
at your home forge
to complete this challenge.
‐ Four days instead of five,
and I got to do a sword
and a knife?
It's gonna take some
serious time management,
but I believe
I can pull this off.
‐ At the end of those
four days,
you'll return and present
your weapons
to our panel of expert judges,
and after they've thoroughly
tested them,
they'll have no problem
declaring one of you
the "Forged in Fire" champion
who leaves here
with a check for 10 grand.
Good luck, bladesmiths.
We will see you in four days.
‐ Brother.
‐ My man.
[upbeat country music]
‐ So I'm back
in my home forge,
and I'm really excited
about that,
but I get four days to make
two blades, and that's insane.
I don't have time
to do one at a time.
This is gonna be two irons
in the fire
and swapping them in and out.
You know,
I'd much rather be able
to concentrate on one thing,
but this is "Forged in Fire,"
baby.
Got the blades
all forged out.
One of the parameters
for the sword
is that it
has to have a fuller.
Putting these fullers in
is probably
the most nerve‐racking part.
You can get them too deep.
You can get them off‐centered.
Screwing these fullers up
could mean day one
is starting over tomorrow.
Yes, sir, that'll work.
[funky bass music]
‐ I'm finally home.
I'm ready to roll.
Check it once, check it twice,
check it ten times.
Today I want to get started
with my bi knife,
so I know how much time
I have to work with
to make that long messer.
Blade's got to be
between here and here.
This homie don't mess up
his lengths.
I've managed to forge out
the bi knife.
Things are going a lot quicker
than I ever expected
they would be.
I'm likin' it.
So I'm gonna start attacking
the long messer.
I've never done anything
quite that size.
Come here, you big monster.
It's scaring the bejeebers
out of me.
Still got my fingers crossed
that I've got
the length I want.
♪ ♪
‐ I'm ready to quench.
Two quenches, twice the work,
twice the worry.
Yes, sir.
The messer sword
is up to temperature,
and it's time to quench.
Here comes the real test.
Please be hard.
Yes. Hell yes.
This is my baby now,
so let me take care of it.
So after the quench,
I want to hand‐forge the guard
out of a railroad spike
as a nod to the challenge
that we had to face.
I want mine to represent me,
so the name of my shop is
Old Wolf Forge,
and I'm the old wolf,
so I grind the shape of a wolf
head into the side guard.
I feel like I'm, you know,
putting a part of myself
in there.
Ended up really well,
so ready to rock tomorrow.
♪ ♪
‐ I've got the bi knife
well under control.
Got it heat‐treated.
Today I need to get
the messer heat‐treated.
That's gonna be a scary time.
All right, here we go.
If it cracks,
I don't know that
I'm gonna have enough time
to make another one.
The last 18 hours of busting
my butt comes up to this.
‐ If it cracks,
right now, the only plan B
Right now, the only plan B
I can think of is cry.
[hard rock music]
♪ ♪
[exhales]
That's called a sigh of relief.
♪ ♪
[laughs]
Son of a bitch.
[chuckles]
This son of a gun is straight.
Oh, that worked great.
♪ ♪
‐ I'm starting day four,
and I'm a lot more tired
than I was at day one.
I'm getting the parts together
for the messer sword.
I'm doing the final fit
and grind on them.
[chuckles]
Dual wield.
The thing just makes you feel
like a badass
when you're holding it.
I mean, I have to chop
something with it,
so to test my messer sword,
I do an antler chop.
Antler is some tough stuff,
and if it survives it,
it should survive anything.
Hopefully it doesn't break.
I'm getting what I want.
I'm still gonna try and get it
a little sharper for slicing,
but for chopping, man,
it's freaking awesome.
♪ ♪
‐ All I got is fit, finish.
I'm getting ready to drill
my scales for the messer,
get them fitted up,
and then it'll be time
to do a basic cleanup on it.
It's feeling right size for me,
which means
it's too big for them.
So I just got to profile
a couple of handles
and we are done.
A little bit tip heavy,
but it's not so heavy
that I think
it would be unwieldable.
It's the end of day four,
it's the end of my build,
and I'm ready to collapse.
[loud thud]
♪ ♪
‐ Gentlemen, you've had
four days at your home forges
to work on
your finale weapons.
John, how did it go?
‐ It went all right.
The long messer
is 5160 spring steel,
and I gave it a cold blue
for stealth.
The bi knife, on the other
hand, is 80CRV2,
and it's also cold blue
for stealth.
‐ Jeff, how did it go for you?
‐ Surprisingly, really well.
They are both hand‐forged
from 1095 steel.
The guard is railroad spikes
as well as the butt caps.
‐ Now it's time to see if they
hold up in our tests.
There will be a strength test,
a sharpness test,
and up first, Doug's KEAL test.
‐ All right, bladesmiths,
this is the pig carcass
slice and dice.
I will take your weapon
and deliver killing blows
on this pig carcass.
John, you're up first.
You ready for this?
‐ Let's make some bacon, bud.
This is not
an easy test to pass.
This is where I find out
did I make a sword
or a couple pieces
of scrap metal?
♪ ♪
[intense music]
Oh, yeah.
♪ ♪
Yes.
‐ All right, John,
your messer is sharp.
It's a little bit
forward heavy,
but the weight lends itself
to chop the pig in half.
Now your bi knife, razor‐sharp.
Those cuts alone were cutting
deeply with every move,
and overall,
sir, it will KEAL.
‐ Oh, yes.
‐ All right, Jeff, your turn.
You ready?
‐ Yes, sir.
‐ Let's do this.
‐ Doug Marcaida is gonna
pick up the stuff that I made
and he's gonna test it
on this pig,
so I'm a little bit nervous
at this point.
♪ ♪
[intense music]
[chuckles]
‐ All right, Jeff, your messer.
Beautiful balance.
It's not forward heavy.
It actually is something
I can wield forward.
Same balance on the recovery
when I'm pulling back to cut.
Now, your bi knife.
The edge is razor‐sharp
with every cut
and stab that it does.
Overall, sir, your weapons,
they will KEAL.
‐ Thank you, sir.
‐ All right, gentlemen,
now, to test the strength
and durability of your blades,
I'll be chopping
into our log here.
Now, remember,
this is not about
what your messers
are gonna do to that log,
but what that log might do
to your messers,
and then I'm gonna take
your bi knives
and we're gonna do a tip test
by driving that tip
of your blade into that log.
All right, Johnny, you're up.
You ready?
‐ Do your worst.
‐ Okay.
‐ Dave's about ready to swing
my messer into a log.
I've only tested about a twig.
I don't know
how it's gonna perform.
I'm worried that
it could shatter or bend.
The guard could come loose.
This has got to survive,
or I'm done.
[driving rock music]
♪ ♪
[wood cracking]
‐ All right, John, well,
let's start with your messer.
Your edge is still sharp.
Blade's still
straight, true.
Your blade's got
a lot of weight to it.
Your handle is
a little confusing
when you're swinging this.
Having that bead right there,
my hand kind of wants to go
all the way up to the guard,
and having the well further
back sort of pushes my hand
a little bit back behind
where I'd like it to be.
As far as your bi knife goes,
not a mark on it.
Really well done.
‐ Thank you, sir.
‐ All right, Jeff, your turn.
You ready?
‐ Yes, sir.
‐ Okay.
‐ There is a chance that
my weapon is gonna break,
and a weapon break
is one of the last things
that you want to have happen.
[driving rock music]
♪ ♪
‐ If there is one thing
that I can pick
that I wouldn't want him to do,
it's to hammer my knife in
and then bend it on the tip,
so my heart is in my throat.
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
‐ All right, I'm gonna start
with your messer.
What I really like about
this blade
is the way you balanced it,
puts all that weight
right back in my hand
where I want it.
Your knife,
it's a really pretty piece.
It's very comfortable
in the hand
but just a little brittle
on the tip.
But they are both
beautiful pieces. Nicely done.
‐ Thank you, sir.
‐ All right, bladesmiths,
the rope slice surprise.
Now, unlike the strength test,
this is all about
what your edge will do
to the different materials
we have out here.
John, you're up first.
Are you ready for this?
‐ Please do, sir.
‐ Let's do this.
[intense music]
♪ ♪
‐ Whew.
‐ All right, John,
on the first cut
with your bi knife,
it's a light knife.
It didn't cut
all the way through.
It started to unravel,
and, of course,
your messer finished that off.
On these tubes, this cut
cleanly all the way through.
Your weapons, sir, will cut.
‐ Thank you.
‐ All right, Jeff,
it's your turn.
You ready, sir?
‐ Yes, sir.
Going into
this sharpness test,
if my blades don't outperform
John's, you know, it's over.
[intense music]
♪ ♪
‐ All right, Jeff, first up,
your bi knife.
Despite the fact that just
the tip broke off,
the edge is razor‐sharp.
With one cut, it cut cleanly
through the rope.
Your messer, once again,
the balance just feels
so good in the hand.
It's such an easy weapon
to wield and slice.
Overall, sir,
your weapons will cut.
‐ Thank you, sir.
They're gonna be judging
both of these weapons,
not just one.
The knife broke, but the sword
performed above and beyond.
It's anybody's game, I think.
♪ ♪
‐ Bladesmiths, the judges'
deliberation is complete.
They've made
their final decision.
Our new "Forged in Fire"
champion is...
♪ ♪
Jeff, congratulations.
You're the new
"Forged in Fire" champion.
John, unfortunately,
your blades
did not make the cut.
‐ John, while Jeff's bi knife's
tip broke on the strength test,
it outperformed yours
in the sharpness test.
The combination of the balance
and the forward weight
in your handle design,
that's the reason
we're sending you home.
‐ John, please
surrender your blades.
‐ Somebody has to win, and
I wish it could've been me,
but I honestly feel the judges
made the right decision.
Jeff's messer
was a work of art,
and he deserved to win.
What I loved about this
is that it stretched me
far beyond what I thought
I could do, and I did it.
♪ ♪
‐ Jeff, congratulations.
You're the new
"Forged in Fire" champion,
and that's a title that comes
with a check for $10,000.
How do you feel right now?
‐ [chuckles]
Uh, validated.
‐ Sir, please present
your blades to the judges.
‐ I'm happy.
I can't even describe
my emotions right now.
"Forged in Fire"
champion, baby.
Bringing it back to Kentucky.
Hell yeah. Yes!
[intense music]
♪ ♪